# On Prayer

Prayer is the center of the interior life. It is everything--everything hangs together or falls apart with prayer. Why is this? Because it is through prayer that we come into direct contact with God. The center of the interior life is intimacy with God. Loving God. But how do you love him if you never come into the presence of God? How do you love him without communicating with him? It is through prayer that we come into God's presence and communicate with him. It is through prayer that we directly express our love for God.

Through prayer we seek after God. We search for him. Desire him. Yearn for him. Pursue him. In prayer all comes together. God is always with us, but we are not always with him. Prayer reorients us on God, focusing on him and loving him. This is the essence of prayer: loving attention on God.

Vocal prayer is the beginning of prayer. In vocal prayer, either alone or as a group, we offer our words to the Lord. But in order for this to really be _prayer_, it must be a matter of the attention of our mind as well. Or words alone are meaningless unless our mind _means_ them. Put another way, the words embody the intention. The intention, which is what the words mean to signify, is what really matters. This is the act of the conscious mind, lifting up towards God. In liturgical prayer, the words may be supplied by and outside source--the liturgical document. If we merely recite them mechanically, we may want and intend to pray, but we are falling short of really praying the words we are saying. This only occurs when we add to the words our own mental assent, beginning with our attentiveness to the words and their meaning. This prayer of the body and mind can be joined as well with the prayer of the heart though the inclination of the will, loving God and attending to him through the prayer. This love of the will must not be confused with the "love" which is of the emotions. Such as love is bodily in nature, and not that of the spirit or heart. Prayer that consists in emotion and action alone does not raise even to including the mind, and thus falls short of really being prayer.

The next stage of prayer is mental prayer. In mental prayer, the mind prays with words from within, or with images or thoughts that are not encased or embodied in human language. When mental prayer is discursive in nature--including either words or images which we bring forth from our minds--this can also be termed 'meditation'. (Though different traditions have different uses of the word meditation.) As with vocal prayer, this can and should be joined with the love of the heart--willing ourselves and giving ourselves wholly to God. This is the ultimate act of prayer--perpetual self-giving.

The third type of prayer is prayer of the heart alone. This is also sometimes called contemplation. Contemplative prayer rises above words and images and focuses the heart on God in a pure loving attention. There are many kinds of contemplation that have been described by spiritual authors, but the core of all of them remains the loving presence of God. Contemplation, more than any other form of prayer, cannot be entered into without grace. Whether contemplation is active or passive, this prayer of the heart is more the work of the Holy Spirit in us than an action of our own will. But, as in all God does, the Holy Spirit does not act in us without our willing consent, even when we give this passively.

Prayer need not always be conscious. The Holy Spirit groans within us with prayer unendingly. But if prayer can be unconsious, how can it be loving attention? This leads to a deeper understanding of the human heart--the human person. That beyond conscious mind is spirit, or heart. Some of the ancient Eastern mystics call this _nous_, usually translated "Intellect" (and purposefully capitalized). It is in this highest part of the soul that we can know God most purely. The spirit within us groans for God, and it is here that the innermost room is to be found where we are contemplating him. Thus some mystical authors have described the action of "placing your mind in your heart" to describe the joining--the one-ing of the mind and spirit, which are so often not aligned. This is the case when contemplation is conscious, but when it is not conscious, the heart goes on praying and attending in love to the Creator without the attention of the concsious mind. In this way many spiritual persons have always gone forth in the presence of the Lord even when their mind was required to attend to matters of the body.

It is this perpeptual prayer that we long for and seek--that we might always be joined to God and do everything with him and through him. For this we long for and pray most ardently--to never be separated from our beloved. In the words of Sr. Josefa Menendez, given in a vision from Mary Immaculate, "Oh my beloved, who are also my God, make my heart a pure flame of love for thee!"
